Welcome to the next
week of our course
on parallel functional
programming with Java.
We start this week
by wrapping up
our coverage of
the combining phase
of Java parallel
streams internals, which
focuses on the behavior of--
and differences between--
concurrent and non-concurrent
collectors.
As discussed in prior
weeks, a collector
is an interface
whose implementations
can accumulate input elements
into a so-called mutable result
container.
Collector implementations
can either
be concurrent, or
non-concurrent, depending
on their characteristics.
A non-concurrent
collector can be
used for either a sequential
stream or a parallel stream.
It works by merging sub-results
into a final reduced result.
In contrast, a
concurrent collector
is only relevant for
parallel streams.
It works by creating just
one concurrent mutable result
container, and
accumulating elements
into it from multiple threads
in the parallel stream.
In addition to showing
how to implement
concurrent and
non-concurrent collectors,
we also analyze a program that
quantifies the performance
differences between concurrent
and non-concurrent collectors
when applied to
parallel and sequential
streams on
different-sized inputs.
The remainder of the
lessons this week
focus on the design
and implementation
of yet another search
stream gang variant
that finds phrases in the
complete work of William
Shakespeare.
This variant uses parallel
streams in three ways.
First, it searches
chunks of input strings,
each containing a work of
Shakespeare in parallel.
Second, it searches
chunks of phrases
in each work of
Shakespeare in parallel.
And third and finally, it
uses a parallel spliterator
to search for phrases in chunks
of each work of Shakespeare
in parallel.
This highly-aggressive
parallelism strategy
yields the highest performance
of all the search stream gang
variance, since its
granularity of parallelism
is finer, and thus
better able to leverage
all available processor cores.
At the heart of this
strategy is the spliterator's
tri-split method,
which is an advanced
Java parallel streams
programming mechanism that
partitions each
work of Shakespeare
into chunks that can be
searched in parallel.
When this splitting occurs
evenly and efficiently,
the performance improvements
can be significant.
However, the tri-split method
must be carefully programmed
to ensure it doesn't split
a work of Shakespeare
in a way that prevents a
phrase from matching at all.